http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/jj574169.aspx


    TechNet
    Products
    IT Resources
    Downloads
    Training
    Support

TechNet
United States (English)
Sign in
Home Library Learn Downloads Support
Export (0) Print
TechNet Library
Windows Server
Windows Server 2012 R2 and Windows Server 2012
Server Roles and Technologies
Networking
Network Subsystem Performance Tuning
Choosing a Network Adapter
Performance Tuning Network Adapters
Network-Related Performance Counters
Performance Tools for Network Workloads
Expand
Network Subsystem Performance Tuning
5 out of 6 rated this helpful - Rate this topic

Updated: August 15, 2012

Applies To: Windows Server 2012


Performance tuning the network subsystem, particularly for network intensive workloads, can involve each layer of the network architecture, which is also called the network stack. These layers are broadly divided into the following sections.

    Network interface. This is the lowest layer in the network stack, and contains the network driver that communicates directly with the network adapter.

    Network Driver Interface Specification (NDIS). NDIS exposes interfaces for the driver below it and for the layers above it, such as the Protocol Stack.

    Protocol Stack. The protocol stack implements protocols such as TCP/IP and UDP/IP. These layers expose the transport layer interface for layers above them.

    System Drivers. These are typically clients that use a transport data extension (TDX) or Winsock Kernel (WSK) interface to expose interfaces to user-mode applications. The WSK interface was introduced in Windows Server® 2008 and Windows Vista, and it is exposed by AFD.sys. The interface improves performance by eliminating the switching between user mode and kernel mode.

    User-Mode Applications. These are typically Microsoft solutions or custom applications.

The table below provides a vertical illustration of the layers of the network stack, including examples of items that run in each layer.
 

5
	

User-Mode Applications
	

WMS
	

DNS
	

IIS

4
	

System Drivers
	

AFD.sys
	

HTTP.sys
	

3
	

Protocol Stack
	

TCP/IP
	

UDP/IP
	

VPN

2
	

NDIS
	

Network Driver Interface Specification (NDIS)
	

	

1
	

Network interface
	

Network driver
	

	

The following sections of this guide provide performance tuning recommendations for network devices and the network stack.

    Choosing a Network Adapter

    Performance Tuning Network Adapters

    Network-Related Performance Counters

    Performance Tools for Network Workloads

Was this page helpful?
Yes
No
Community Additions
ADD
© 2014 Microsoft
Manage Your Profile

    Newsletter
    |
    Contact Us
    |
    Privacy Statement
    |
    Terms of Use
    |
    Trademarks

|
Site Feedback Site Feedback