http://sciencegateways.org/what-is-a-science-gateway/
What Is a Science Gateway?

A Science Gateway is a community-developed set of tools, applications, and data collections that are integrated through a portal or a suite of applications. Gateways provide access to a variety of capabilities including workflows, visualization, resource discovery, and job execution services.

Science Gateways enable entire communities of users with a common scientific goal to use digital resources through a common interface, even when such resources are geographically distributed. The digital resources in this context could be anything from a highly tuned parallel application running on a supercomputer to a Hadoop analysis running on a commercial cloud to a shared instance of Matlab running on a department workstation. The key point is that Science Gateways provide value-added interfaces to access these shared resources.

Science Gateways commonly take one of these three forms:

    A gateway packaged as a web portal, with users using  the front end to access digital services provided through the back end.
    A grid-bridging gateway, with communities running their own grids devoted to their areas of science (in these cases, a Science Gateway is a mechanism for extending the reach of the community’s grid by coupling it with digital services from another organization).
    A gateway that lets users run a desktop or mobile application to access remote digital services.

Science Gateways can have varying goals and implementations. Some expose specific sets of community codes so that anonymous scientists can run them. Others may serve as a “metaportal,” a community portal that brings a broad range of new services and applications to the community. A common trait of all types is their interaction with back-end digital services to provide value-added capabilities to the end user.

HUBzero is one platform that has been used to build many science gateways. Here is a short video that conveys the breadth of functions offered by a science gateway, in this case powered by HUBzero.

Some more examples of Science Gateways can be found through the XSEDE Science Gateways Program.